# Three Performances: A Virtual (Musical) Improvisation

Mathias Maschat and Christopher Williams
Adaptation for Notation Cultures Conference

## Intro (CW)

- personal info
- context of book chapter
- changes for today

## ► Play (MM)

Bearing in mind that there is no improvisation without the live, we— musicians and researchers with interests in improvisation, performativity and notation—came together to create a unique musical performance. Even if the here and now is nourished from the past and from future expectations, live- ness is the primal paradigm of every musical improvisation, characterised by archetypal elements such as temporal continuity, real time action and reaction, presence, originality, immediacy, intimacy, indeterminacy, eventness, existence in the moment, and so forth. As Saladin and Guionnet write:

>[f]ree improvisation is liveness taken to a radical extreme. Improvisation arises from an immediate and playful confrontation with the specific characteristics of a situation, whereby relationships between all the elements present—the instruments, players, space, public, whatever—acquire an intensity born precisely of an awareness that everything, at every moment, hangs in the balance.(2011)

This was our first musical encounter, an ad hoc session with no prior agree- ments about the musical instruments to be played, structural developments, etc. The temporal and spatial conditions, as well as our personal histories and dispo- sitions, were the basis of performance. We happened to use a guitar, a trombone, a piano, a synthesiser, a home stereo with audio cassettes and CDs, and assorted objects found at the site of the performance. By including pre-recorded media, sometimes played in rewind or fast forward, we impurifi ed the liveness of our original performance from the outset.

Occasionally, we moved around and out of the room, allowing bodily move- ments and positions to become part of the performance. The ensuing sounds, mixed with citations read aloud from books or CD booklets found in the shelves, constituted a live performance in which we were simultaneously actors and witnesses. In our experience no further audience apart from us two was necessary to implement a sense of liveness; as will be explored in the following pages, we consider liveness to be a feeling or state of mind enacted by an indi- vidual, independent of the object of his or her attention.

Along the way, we recorded our actions to document the live event. That recording now serves as a memory and point of departure for the present chap- ter, in which we wish our improvisation to continue its transformed existence in another dimension of mediality, with potential for other sorts of liveness.

>Take instrument out of case—you haven’t done this in a while. Place mouthpiece to lips, blow gently through the slide, opening and closing spit valve. Play a hot sloppy [F 4th line bass clef] and follow your broken lips up and down the overtones.

## 1 The Original Performance is Past, this is its ‘Mediatized’ Representation

Following Philip Auslander’s argument that ‘ “[m]ediatized performance” is performance that is circulated on television, as audio or video recordings, and in other forms based in technologies of reproduction’, (2008, 4) we also con- sider texts, books or scores to be technologies of reproduction. In this sense the transcription of the original performance beginning on your left could serve as documentation—or ‘mediatized performance’—of the primary event, much as would an audio- or videotape, with a few obvious differences.

At the same time we also agree with Derek Bailey’s critique of ‘the loss during the recording process of the atmosphere of [improvised] musical activity—the musical environment created by the performance’. (1992, 103) Clearly the score cannot be considered a comprehensive or transparent repre- sentation of the initial situation, as equally any audio- or videotape cannot. To begin with, its perspectives are strategic—they fail on a practical level to capture the action from every angle. Furthermore, the temporal and spatial co-presence of the musicians and the audience has vanished, radically changing the ‘imme- diate’ aspect of the improvised event.

Still, the possibility is given that it carries some of the (live) fl avour of the initial situation by retaining and sharing with the reader some provisions for recreating its spirit and specifi city; here we recall Paul Sanden’s statement that ‘[l]iveness represents a perceived trace of that which could be live ’. (2013, 6) The score assumes the position of a listener who is there , in the performance, attempting to make sense of a music in its emergence as his or her focus bounces among disparate sounds, gestures, and temporalities. To this end, different events are represented with different kinds and degrees of detail—some include specifi c pitches and/ or articulations, where others are simply assigned a general verbal description (‘rustling’) or association (‘Tristan’) or a physical location in the room (‘hallway’).

> Leave the room, following your lips. 
> Shut the door. Resume hot slop. Knock. 
> Open the door. Return. 
> Join pianist:

While temporal and/or spatial co-presence is traditionally the minimum requirement for the defi nition of liveness, in our case none is given in a direct sense. However, if we refl ect on Auslander’s claim that ‘liveness can no longer be defi ned in terms of either the presence of living human beings before each other or physical or temporal relationships’, (2008, 62) why couldn’t liveness be experienced here in written form, as in other ‘mediatized’ rep- resentations? Instructions in present progressive tense like ‘blowing air’ or imperatives such as ‘growl’ or ‘insert colorblind’ might give a clue to the moment-related immediacy of the score. Or the informal memo-like qual- ity of the handwriting might hold the potential to draw you into a more intimate connection with the virtual performance. While it is diffi cult to measure the effects of liveness in these cases, they do seem to substantiate Auslander’s suggestion ‘that thinking about the relationship between live and mediatized forms in terms of ontological oppositions is not especially pro- ductive, because there are few grounds on which to make signifi cant onto- logical distinctions’. (2008, 55)

## 2 This is the Performance, you are the Audience

> TACET

The second performance is located in the accumulation and presentation of signs that you are decoding at the moment. Having characterised the score (and the present text) as the ‘mediatized’ representation of the original performance, we should also articulate their distance from the event itself. The inher- ent limitations of the recorded reference and the human ear listening back can only capture a narrow slice of the original event. And just as ‘script is not simply the graphic fi xation of spoken language’, (Krämer 2002, 341) a score is not the mere picture of the sounding music; any score—even a transcription— is an artefact used to make music, and thus by necessity omits certain details about its sounding result. For these reasons we can assume that a transcription of sounding music is always reductive. At the same time transcriptive notation produces new qualities not inherent in original performances. As Hartmut Möller states:

> [s]ystems of written notation relegate a serial, temporally shifted stream of data to a visual fi eld and thereby untether parts of the communication from the context of their origination. Notations accentuate, shorten, and abstract given the abundance of the real sounding event and start a life of their own as documents that allow or even provoke diverse versions. (As quoted in Ungeheuer 2011, 176, authors’ emphasis)

The layout of the score, for example, in lines read left to right bound by page size, implies phrases or temporal units beyond those of the original performance. Likewise, the tools of inscription—ink pens and an idiosyncratic typewriter—create internal visual connections and disjunctions with no exter- nal sounding correlate.

A performative tension is produced by this triangulation of a ‘factual’ past live event, what is lost in its ‘mediatized’ representation, and what is added by the particularities of the medium. You may imagine who ‘Tristan’ is, how the ‘HALLWAY’ looks, why its letters are capitalised, or what happens on the next page, even before you do anything with the score out loud. Following Martin Zenck, the score can thus be regarded as a performance even without its fac- tual recreation in an event: ‘a score, the music, becomes performative not only through the performance, but performative aspects are already found in the external tension between form tectonics and inscribed fi gure’. (2011, 20) (For historical precedents of scores whose performances require nothing more than the act of reading itself see Dieter Schnebel’s MO-NO: Music to Read (1969), Yoko Ono’s Grapefruit (1970) or Josef Anton Riedl’s Optische Lautgedichte (See Ungeheuer 2011; Zeller 1998).)

Such performativity and ‘external tension’ are by no means limited to our score or to musical notation in general. Indeed, there are many ways to com- prehend the performativity of texts in and through themselves: ‘self-referentiality, meaning the exhibition of processes of thinking and articulation, [. . .] simulated or factual orality, dialogical structure, plurimediality or the focusing on the embodied act of utterance’. (Häsner et al. 2011, 76) Many such examples are to be found in this analytical text and elsewhere in this book (see for example, Dworkin). In this sense, the ‘form tectonics’ of the notation to your right are not limited to an autonomous score. It might be said that this entire volume is a stage and that you are following one act of the play upon it through the process of reading. You are attending our second performance as authors of this text and score, in the form of a ‘performance-reading’— conceived here as the cousin of a performance-lecture—in real time with your own modes of reception.

> TACET

## 3 You are the Performer, the Performance is About to Take Place

Taking this claim a step further, we would argue that you are not only the audi- ence attending our performance—you are also the performer of these pages engaged in the ‘act of reading,’ as Wolfgang Iser (1976) has famously characterised the individual instantiation of a given text. This happens as you move along our thoughts and previous artistic acts, make temporal sense of them, shift your attention from the verbal text to the score, or wander back and forth among the pages of the physical book. The third performance has been in full swing for a while then, but it still seems to hold potential for further development.

> A few muddy long notes, gradually windier. 
> [Whole rest—Fermata] 
> Remove slide, twirl in circles like a baton. 
> Continue, announce: > “I shall twirl until you are finished.” 
> [Pf fragment]

While the symbols and words on these pages may be nominally static, you actively choose when and how to navigate among them. This is a special case of what Iser has termed the reader’s ‘wandering viewpoint’, (1976, 177–218) or ‘the mode, by which the reader is present within the text’ (1976, 193) in which:

> there is a potential time-sequence which the reader must inevitably realize, as it is impossible to absorb even a short text in a single moment. Thus the reading process always involves viewing the text through a perspective that is continually on the move, linking up the different phases, and so constructing what we have called the virtual dimension. This dimension, of course, varies all the time we are reading. (1972, 285)

While Iser prioritises the role of narrative memory and expectation in the read- ing process, the same principle of non-linear grouping applies to the counter- point of the different elements in Three Performances. The numerical timeline in the score is only one layer of temporal understanding; the way you situate this unfolding within the chapter is another. Have you read the score on the right hand pages fi rst, coming back to the analysis on the left hand pages, or vice- versa? Have you read the chapter continuously from left to right in two-page episodes, interrupting the musical performance for theoretical clarifi cation? Have you concentrated only on one element or the other? When, if ever, have you shuffl ed back and forth in search of a context for the unexplained instruc- tions inlaid here between paragraphs of the analytical text?

However you have chosen to read, you are interacting with the text, and this, according to Iser, is what produces meaning. (1970, 7) Meaning is not neces- sarily there , but it is co-created by an active reader dealing with the offerings and possibilities of the text. In our case this interaction can go beyond mere imagination, materialising in concrete action: to enhance this interactive expe- rience of liveness in the reading process, you may even like to recreate the piece, preparing your own performance score for it, improvising with the material, or adding more material. We have provided spaces in the score for this purpose. You could perhaps join with one or two friends taking over the different parts, integrating elements from the left hand pages into the performance material. You will notice many ‘blank spaces’ (Iser 1970, 15–16) that produce a high degree of ‘indeterminacy’. (Iser 1970, 15–16) These spaces aim to amplify your experience of how ‘the more the texts lose determinacy, the more the reader is engaged in the co-construction of their possible intentions’. (Iser 1970, 8) If this sounds like a hopeless vagary, focus on a few details in the middle of the previous page. The fi rst three dots might suggest a series of short soft sounds in a regular rhythm. Alternatively, they may be an ellipsis, or a continuation of previous activity. Below and to the right, the origin of the typewritten text below the word ‘police’ is not clarifi ed. Do you recognise anything about it—within or outside the score?

# ◄◄ Rewind / ►► Fast Forward

Iser compared texts to musical scores, stressing that the reader’s individual skills are responsible for the instrumentation of the work. (1976, 177) Meaning thus ‘appears in individual form’ (Iser 1970, 7) interwoven with the experiences, atti- tudes, knowledge, expectations, feelings and will that you contribute to these performances. In this sense we underline Auslander’s thesis that the ‘emerging def- inition of liveness may be built primarily around the audience’s affective experi- ence’. (2008, 62) At the same time, we also expand this thesis by highlighting how this theoretical audience, in the act of reception, takes over the role of a performer. The reader performs and actively participates in the process of co-constructing meaning and individual experience and the seemingly separate entities of per- formers and recipients thus start to overlap and to permeate each other.

Our conception of liveness locates the recipient-performer’s affective experi- ence in direct action and interaction beyond temporal-spatial attendance. With Erika Fischer-Lichte we believe that texts and/ or scores are comparable to ‘speech acts, symbolic physical actions and practices and performances [. . .]— characterized by the unpredictability of reading, ambivalences and transforma- tive power, which is capable of changing the reader for the time of reading and maybe even enduringly beyond that’. (2012, 145) Ultimately, this is speculation: we cannot say if the experience of reading, hearing, and/ or performing this chapter has indeed changed you. Neither do we know if it has reached any meaningful degree of liveness as we have characterised the term. Only you can confi rm or deny if this is the case through your own empirical ‘test’ of having read, heard and/ or performed it. The function of this speculative quality has thus been to invite you to explore relationships that might bear out our claims.

Should we have succeeded, the broader intention is that Three Performances move beyond these rarefi ed pages to help ‘restore continuity between the refi ned and intensifi ed forms of experience that are works of art and everyday events, doings and sufferings that are universally recognised to constitute experience’. (Dewey 1980, 3) That is to say, we believe the experience of liveness can hap- pen anytime anywhere: whether you are improvising your own performance, reading and envisioning a score or analytical text, recreating a work seen through your own perspective, and therefore establishing a new reality. Or even just dealing with everyday personal activities, for as John Cage describes it ‘[e]ach moment is absolute, alive and signifi cant’. (1973, 113).
